---
title: What is Python and is it different from CPython, Cython, and PyPy?
date: 2023-05-10 00:00:01 -0800
categories: [Software]
tags: [python, mojo]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
---

> 99% of the time, when anyone says `Python`, they mean `CPython`.
{: .prompt-tip }

# So Is Python Different from CPython?

As the green intro tip implies, colloquially, the two are identical. 

However, for language nerds, `Python` can be considered an interface. Henceforth, when I write `Python` in block text, I mean the interface.

`Python` is the abstract concept of all the syntax (`def`, `class`, `=`, `in`, `not`, `dict`) and, depending on who you ask, the full standard library. It is not the actual software you download from [python.org](https://www.python.org/). That is the **implementation**.

CPython is the reference implementation of `Python`, more on this in the next section.

There are other languages that do this like `Ruby` with [JRuby](https://www.jruby.org/) and `ECMAscript` with Javascript and [ActionScript](https://helpx.adobe.com/animate/using/actionscript.html).

One could even argue that `Java` has multiple implementations, in the form of Oracle Java and Android Java. Although litigious companies are [not nearly as kind](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_LLC_v._Oracle_America,_Inc.) to this sort of copying as open source communities. 

There's nuances in interface and implementation. Strict definitions of them are not portable between communities. Any attempt at defining exact meanings quickly break down like trying to [define life](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Life#Definitions). 

Just know that a language itself is the interface (how you write it in a text editor), and the software is the implementation (how to convert that language into bits for the machine). For most langauges, the two are inseparable unless 

# CPython (Or just "Python")

When most developers say Python, they mean CPython, the virtual machine, the interpreter, and the compiler, all vetted by the Python OSS maintainers. They, of course, also mean the language because lumping them together simplified a lot of unnecessary detail.

This is what you get when you `brew install` on your Mac or download and install from [python.org](https://www.python.org/). It is the reference implementation of `Python`. 

Using the reference has many advantages
* Will be on the latest version of the language
* Always developed alongside language features
* Will be the least buggy (Usually)
* Will have the most compatability with 3rd party libraries.

On the downside, CPython is slow, slower than many other implementations.

To counteract this, CPython, being built for C, allows for easy interoperability with C and C++ compiled code, which can be written to be extremely fast.

This is why CPython is so popular for research and machine learning. Researchers are able to write the computationally expensive parts in C or C++ and then glue them together with very readable python code. 

Python, being interpreted, also allows for very quick distribution and modification, as well as editing code during runtime. The ultimate expression of this is IPython, an interactive shell that can output rich GUI elements.

# Jython, IronPython, Cython, PyPy, and More

These alternative implementations of Python are usually trying to tap into another language's virtual machine,  

## Jython
As the name implies, it is Python running in a JVM, allowing access to the huge Java ecosystem. Probably the most used outside of the reference implementation.

## IronPython
Python written to interact with .NET libraries

## Cython
Cython is a strange one. It transpiles Python to C and thus has very good C interoperability. This is different from CPython (`yes, I know`) in that it has additional syntax and features allowing for direct interaction with C code and not just C-compiled libraries.

> I strongly suspect the original authors and maintainers just wanted to mess with all Python beginners with the name.
{: .prompt-info }

## PyPy

PyPy is another strange one. It is a python written with a JIT compiler which means it can run certain workloads much faster than CPython. It started as a research project to build a JIT compiler for Python and has endured as one of the older Python implementations. A big reason is probably because it has good interoperability with [Django](https://www.djangoproject.com/), the extremely popular web framework that many startups used in the late 2000s to mid 2010s before Node.js became dominant.

## Other Implementations

Unsurprisingly, Python's open nature and attractiveness to researchers lead it to have [many implementations](https://wiki.python.org/moin/PythonImplementations). 

Many of these implementations were also sponsored by aforementioned startups trying to speed up their stack without completely rewriting everything in a different language.

# The Future

AI being the hot new thing means Python is quickly gaining back a lot of marketshare lost to Node.js.

A recently announced new implementation is [Mojo](https://www.modular.com/mojo). They don't call themselves an implementation because it is technically a superset with additional functionality, but then so is Cython.....

Regardless of how they define themselves, Mojo is interesting because the backing company is headed by [Chris Lattner](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chris_Lattner) of Apple Swift and LLVM fame. Whether this just becomes another random implementation or a true successor to Python like Typescript with Javascript depends on how quickly they can gain traction and integrate with existing libraries.

This implementation is ostensibly designed for machine learning because new models like StableDiffusion and GPT require so much computational power. But I suspect Chris could not help but also find all the frustrating parts of Python and improve on them.

The performance boost is nice, but static variables, type checking, and non-monkeypatchable classes would allow for much more powerful static analysis and auto-completion. I'm looking forward to a Typescript-esque revolution of Python.

